This is the second of a two-part
series looking at prophets —
the storytellers who claim special knowledge
of hidden supernatural realms
and unverifiable supernatural beings via revelations.
Having no access to this supposed
special knowledge ourselves
the rest of us are expected to accept
these prophets’ stories without question.
In fact, we’re expected to believe their alleged revelations with as much conviction
as if we’d experienced them firsthand.
Born in the 1700s, Thomas Paine, one of
the founding fathers of the United States
explains the problem with this arrangement.
"Revelation, when applied to religion"
"means something communicated
immediately from God to man."
".... But admitting, for the sake of a case,
that something has been revealed to a certain person"
"and not revealed to any other person,
it is revelation to that person only."
"When he tells it to a second person, a second
to a third, a third to a fourth, and so on"
"it ceases to be a revelation to all those persons."
"It is revelation to the first person only,
and hearsay to every other"
"and consequently they are not obliged to believe it."
"It is a contradiction in terms and ideas"
"to call anything a revelation that comes to us
at second-hand, either verbally or in writing."
Focussing in on the Abrahamic religions,
Paine continues:
"When Moses told the children of Israel
"that he received the two tables
of the commandments from the hands of God"
"they were not obliged to believe him"
"because they had no other
authority for it than his telling them so ...."
"When I am told that the Koran was written in Heaven, and brought to Mahomet by an angel"
".... I did not see the angel myself, and therefore I have a right not to believe it."
"When also I am told that a woman, called the Virgin Mary"
"said, or gave out, that she was
with child without any cohabitation with a man"
"and that her betrothed husband, Joseph,
said that an angel told him so ...."
".... neither Joseph nor Mary
wrote any such matter themselves"
"it is only reported by others that they said so"
"it is hearsay upon hearsay, and I do not
chose to rest my belief upon such evidence."
Paine isn’t alone in rejecting hearsay.
Barring exceptional circumstances,
it’s disallowed as evidence in the courts.
What Paine calls ‘hearsay upon hearsay’
is known as ‘double hearsay’.
And it’s interesting to imagine what would happen
if self-proclaimed prophets tried
to make their cases in a courtroom.
In this atmosphere of probing judicial rigour
their cases would collapse instantly on two grounds.
The first is the aforementioned concept of hearsay.
Any testimony about unsubstantiated messages
from supernatural beings would be inadmissible.
The second is jury tampering,
formerly known as embracery.
Self-proclaimed prophets depend on promises
and threats to sway their audience.
They dangle the carrot of astounding rewards
and brandish the stick of unbearable torture.
But bribery and intimidation are
punishable offences in a courtroom setting.
Without these two tactics of hearsay and jury tampering
by what other means can the
self-proclaimed prophet win over a jury?
Talking of juries, it’s worth reflecting
on the qualities required of their members.
For instance, jurors are adults, able to process
the information before them critically.
They need to be of sound mind,
able to make sound judgements.
And they need to be impartial, having no
personal interest in the outcome.
The rigorous standards seen in courtrooms
are specifically designed to minimise prejudicial
elements
such as fear, ignorance, bias and self-advancement
that can pervert the course of justice.
But prophets rely on all these prejudicial
elements
including the selection of children as their jurors
bypassing impartial sound
critical assessment generation after generation
via childhood indoctrination.
In criminal cases, a mistaken verdict
is a serious business.
Whether an innocent person is found guilty
or a guilty person is found not guilty
the consequences for the parties
involved can be life-changing.
But when it comes to prophets
the consequences of a mistaken verdict
are immeasurably more far-reaching.
When we succumb to their hearsay
and their jury tampering
and mistakenly accept them
as genuine divine representatives
we give them the power
to rewrite the very definition of justice.
Just as light bends around a black hole,
distorted by its tremendous gravity
moral concepts of bad and good
bend around the prophets,
distorted by the infinite divine authority
they claim for themselves.
Child abuse, murder, genocide can all become good
— if the prophets say so.
Critical thinking, knowledge, love can all become bad
Reasoning ourselves out of this perverted
morality can be extremely difficult
partly because, generally speaking,
we didn’t reason ourselves into it.
Can’t go back same way you came.
But also because the perverted morality
we’ve been taught becomes normalised.
In a culture where all babies have their little
fingers chopped off, in deference to their prophet
eight fingers becomes the norm.
The possession of ten fingers
comes to seem disgusting, ungodly —
a sign of animalistic depravity.
When asked why the possession of ten fingers is wrong
members of this culture might offer
many spurious answers.
But, time after time
as the flaws in these answers are exposed,
they’ll give way to the same spurious answer:
because the prophet said so.
That’s where the thinking stops.
When a culture accepts
the moral authority of a prophet
that prophet’s prejudices, hangups and delusions
can be freely expressed
in that culture without challenge.
Anduntil — by reason or by accident — some of its
members manage to look past their prophet,
that culture will remain chained
to a fixed point in history
becoming extremely — sometimes violently
— resistant to progress.
We need to scrutinise the words of prophets
very closely and ask ourselves:
do they really reflect superhuman wisdom?
In Alice Walker’s novel, The Color Purple
14-year-old Celie is married off by an abusive father to an abusive husband, called simply ‘Mr.__’
to look after his children and his house.
She learns to be an obedient, submissive wife.
A few years go by
and Mister’s son Harpo falls in love
with a woman called Sofia
Sofia sees marriage as an equal partnership.
But following his father’s example
Harpo thinks he should be in charge and tries unsuccessfully to verbally dominate Sofia.
Mister tells Harpo that wives are like children.
He encourages Harpo to give her a good sound
beating to show her who’s boss.
Celie is jealous and resentful of Sofia’s
independent nature.
She notices how Sofia just carries on talking
when Harpo and Mister come in the room.
She notices the look of pity on Sofia’s face
every time Celie jumps when Mister calls.
And in a sad self-defeating moment
when Harpo approaches Celie for advice
on handling Sofia, she tells him, ‘Beat her.’
He takes her advice.
But Sofia is strong and in the physical fight
he provokes, he comes off much worse.
To hide his shame, he claims
he was attacked by a mule.
Prior to this fight, Celie notes how happy
Harpo and Sofia had been together —
how after three years Harpo would
still ‘whistle and sing’.
It was Mister’s ideas about wifely
submission
that caused all the unnecessary tension
in Harpo and Sofia’s marriage.
And yet, according to the self-styled prophet of Islam, Muhammad
Mister’s ideas about men and women
were pretty much on target.
In passages Muhammad claimed were dictated
to him by an angel on behalf of an all-knowing god
women are again presented like children
put under the charge of husbands
who they’re expected to obey.
If they rebel, this supposed all-knowing god
ordered an escalating sequence of punishments.
First admonish her, as Harpo
tried to.
If that doesn’t work, withhold sex from her.
If that doesn’t work, do what
Mister and Celie advised: ‘Beat her’.
In claiming to speak for all-knowing beings,
prophets take on a superhuman burden.
Every single pronouncement they make has to reflect
the all-encompassing, timeless wisdom
such beings would possess.
This burden of timelessness was underscored
by Muhammad himself
who proclaimed himself the last prophet
—the seal of the prophets.
His words have to stand for eternity.
But do they?
An all-knowing being would know that
— aside from being infantilising and brutalising —
this sequence of punishments was simply
an unworkable method of conflict resolution.
It’s unworkable because it relies on suppression
— keeping someone down in an inferior position.
That’s not a sustainable system.
As the fictional example of
Sofia and Harpo illustrates
beating doesn’t work with people
who have a healthy sense of self-worth.
They don’t tolerate such demeaning, bullying
behaviour and some of them will fight back hard.
But even in Celie’s case, where we see a broken individual who submitted to beatings for years
a vengeful anger grew inside her
which eventually exploded.
Throughout history countless suppressed groups
have risen up to demand fair treatment
demonstrating what an all-knowing being would know: suppression doesn’t solve problems — it creates them.
An all-knowing being would also know the destructive
impact of trying to impose fixed relationship roles.
Those of us with any broad experience
of people will’ve met male-female couples
who have no problem sharing power and treating
each other respectfully as equals.
We’ll also have met male-female couples where the
man is very happy for the woman to take charge
maybe because in their particular case,
out of the two of them
she happens to be more confident,
more organised, more proactive, more experienced.
Their relationships work because both partners
are a natural, complimentary fit.
Muhammad’s fixed role system in which men
are in charge of women and women devoutly obey
would upset all these healthy, complimentary
dynamics and corrupt these relationships.
One of the fundamental principles
of any wise advice, guideline or law
is that it should not impinge on healthy systems.
Some have defended Muhammad’s fixed role system
on the grounds that if it was followed,
it would create stability.
But the stability defence is fallacious on two counts.
It’s tautological because any system that
everyone followed would create stability.
If everyone followed a system in which women
were in charge of men, there’d be stability.
And it’s also a red herring
because social stability doesn’t mean the rules underpinning that stability are moral or healthy.
Some of the most stable systems
are the most ruthless and sadistic
using fear and coercion to keep people
in fixed roles that benefit some
at the great expense of others.
An all-knowing being would know all of this.
But the being Muhammad claimed
to commune with knew none of it.
There is no timeless wisdom here.
There is no far-reaching vision that
encompasses, accommodates and nurtures
all the healthy variation that exists
within the human species.
Instead we have a painfully parochial, short-sighted vision, grounded in antiquated sexual stereotypes
that attempts to squeeze people into narrow,
fixed roles, stifling their healthy, diverse natures.
Coming from an all-knowing being, this relationship advice makes no sense whatsoever.
What makes perfect sense is that this is the advice
of a seventh-century merchant warlord
whose ideas are deeply rooted in the
less-enlightened social values of his own time.
Apologists for Muhammad’s supposed revelations
offer various red herrings to give a misleading
impression of sexual equality.
Some say Muhammad promoted
equality of basic humanity
by declaring that men and women
originated from the same source.
But by that reasoning, slaves and their masters came from the same source. It doesn’t make them equal.
Some say Muhammad promoted
equality of social responsibility
by declaring men and women protectors of one another.
But the charge of protecting each other
does not give them equal social standing.
Some say Muhammad promoted
the right to receive a fair share of wealth.
But anyone familiar with Muhammad’s inheritance laws
knows that female children inherit
half as much as male children.
Calling these unequal sums a ‘fair share’
doesn’t magically make them fair.
Some apologists have argued that merely giving
a woman any set share of inheritance
was a right unthinkable in many societies.
This is a ‘be grateful for crumbs’ argument.
Offering people a few more rights than they might get
in some other societies is nothing to brag about.
If every society condoned slavery
for adults and children
then one society declared children immune
we could call it a step in the right direction,
but not evidence of superhuman wisdom.
It’s true that some self-styled prophets
might make what — at the time —
appear to be some revolutionary advances
including offering a few more rights to certain groups.
But an all-knowing being would be able to communicate human rights in their complete final form
especially if it was communicating them to its
final prophet, as Muhammad claimed to be.
And yet our understanding of rights has surpassed
Muhammad’s unsurpassable revelations.
The 2:1 sexual ratio is seen in other areas.
For instance, in surah 2, verse 282 of the Qur’an
Muhammad claimed it was divinely
revealed that in judicial circumstances
two female witnesses were required
to stand in for one male witness.
This was so that if one of the women
made a mistake, the other could help her.
But why do women need this backup while men don’t?
What abiding characteristic do women lack
to warrant this strange remedial measure?
If, for example, self-confidence was the issue,
this surah should read:
.... And if there are not two
self-confident people [available]
then [bring] a self-confident person
and two less self-confident people
from those whom you accept as witnesses
so that if one of the less self-confident people
errs, then the other can remind ....
Generalising a trait like poorer
self-confidence to all women here
simultaneously undermines self-confident women
and fails to support unconfident men.
Again, an all-knowing being would know
this was a distorted, inferior system.
But Muhammad presented it
as timeless, unsurpassable wisdom.
Some Muslim apologists make my case for me
when they respond with distaste to some of
Muhammad’s declarations about men and women
or flat-out deny he made them.
In a video called ‘attacking beliefs’, I mentioned
a passage from the Hadith
—the multi-authored reports of the life of Muhammad
written and collected years after his death —
in which Muhammad is quoted saying:
"If a husband calls his wife to his bed and
she refuses and causes him to sleep in anger"
"the angels will curse her till morning."
An ex-Muslim chum of mine said that years ago
he’d questioned a Muslim leader
on this specific passage.
The leader suggested Muhammad
wouldn’t’ve said such a thing
and that the passage had to have some hidden context.
He suggested it might refer to a wife
who’d lost interest in her husband
because she was having an affair.
Clearly, without any mitigating context
the apparent promotion of sexual coercion
depicted here makes for difficult reading.
But making assumptions about what Muhammad
did or didn’t say here is no casual affair.
The consequences for a believer can be substantial.
If this Hadith was intended for all wives
but it’s mistakenly assumed there’s some
hidden context that refers only to adulterous wives
then faithful wives would think it’s
ok for them to refuse their husbands
and would unknowingly be cursed for doing so.
Conversely, if a hidden context does exist
that refers specifically to adulterous wives
but it’s mistakenly assumed that
this Hadith applies to all wives
then faithful wives would be vulnerable to sexual coercion when that was never intended.
Either way, if a mistaken assumption is made
the wife pays for it.
So, what’s a wife to do?
It is of course conceivable that some hidden context
for this Hadith might be unearthed in the future.
But there’s no guarantee that this new context
wouldn’t be even more reprehensible in nature.
Surah 58 verse 22 of the Qur’an
asserts that no believer can have affection
for family members who oppose Islam.
I’ve long been aware of this anti-family passage.
But a few months ago, a hidden context was illuminated by a great YouTuber called The Masked Arab
who gives in-depth Islamic scriptural context
and references on a range of subjects.
He cited the work of Ibn Kathir, described as a
highly respected and influential Islamic scholar
and an expert on tafsir — an Arabic word
meaning ‘exegesis’ or ‘interpretation’.
The Masked Arab noted that, in explaining
the context of this Qur’an verse
Kathir mentions an assortment of relatives,
friends and special representatives
of the central Islamic prophet Muhammad
who each killed or intended to kill
non-believing family members
including fathers, sons, brothers or other
relatives — and were praised for doing so.
Hidden contexts don’t always have a redeeming nature.
They can sometimes reveal
unexpected depths of depravity.
Self-styled prophets take on a superhuman burden.
The words of those who claim to speak for all-knowing
beings must reflect that timeless wisdom.
Unjust religious laws are often defended
with the claim
that humans just aren’t intelligent enough
to see the perfect divine plan behind them.
But the ‘perfect divine plan’ argument could be
used to justify any conceivable act
— including the amputation of children’s fingers.
We don’t need to possess divine intelligence
to understand that laws that encourage bullying,
suppression, inequity and sexual coercion
don’t originate from a morally superior
or praise-worthy source.
Unable to substantiate their claims with hard evidence
prophets repeatedly fall back on
appeals to the unknown.
For instance, they might present their
audience with an apparent mystery
and offer some spurious interpretation for it
that seems to support their bogus claims.
One type of apparent mystery presented
by prophets is known as a ‘miracle’
an event that seems to defy our understanding.
In 1990, former sports presenter David Icke
rebranded himself as a visionary
after reportedly receiving
spiritual messages from a psychic
telling him he was meant ‘to heal the earth’.
He declared that the world was
an illusion — a ‘holographic reality’ —
in which humans were being secretly exploited
by a race of reptilian shape-shifters
that feed off the emotion of fear.
As a comparison, he’s cited the film The Matrix
in which humans are immersed in virtual reality
so that they can be secretly exploited by machines.
In support of this claim
he’s cited stunts like walking through fire,
and walking on lava as examples of miracles.
He’s suggested these miracles are able to be performed if you can disconnect your sense of reality
from the consensus belief that
fire burns and legs get burned.
If you realise it’s all illusion
—or to put it in Matrix language:
"There is no spoon."
Alongside David, let’s now put another individual
associated with similarly impressive-sounding stunts:
the Christian messiah, Jesus, whose
reported ‘miracles’ include walking on water.
So between David and Jesus
we have two examples of purported miracles
involving people walking on substances
they shouldn’t be able to walk on.
But while David’s lava-walking was presented
in support of the claim that the universe
is a holographic illusion
Jesus’s hydro-ambulation was presented
in support a very different claim.
Here, there’s no suggestion that the world isn’t real.
Here, it’s claimed that miracles
are caused by a single powerful being
who can bend the laws of physics
— a god called Yahweh, of which
Jesus was the earthly representative.
These different suggestions about the cause
of miracles conflict with each other.
At least one of these individuals must be wrong.
Possibly both.
The good news we don’t have to waste
our time puzzling over either of them.
What we notice, when we pay attention
to what’s going on here
is that neither individual has provided
any connection whatsoever
between these supposed miracles
and their supposed causes.
When magicians reveal the secret processes
behind their tricks, they provide the connection.
When we see the scaffolding
holding up the levitating man
we gain insight. We understand.
When we’re merely told the magician
has special powers, we don’t understand.
We haven’t been given an explanation.
We’ve been given a story —
something with zero explanatory power.
When lava-walking is presented
as a miracle, it’s a story.
When the principles behind lava-walking are conveyed
in terms we can understand, it’s an explanation.
And it might come as news to David Icke but the
science behind lava-walking is well understood.
Our ability to walk on lava or hot coals relies
on that fact that these carbon-based surfaces
are relatively poor conductors
so their heat is transferred less effectively
than high-conducting materials such as metals
which can easily burn flesh
at much lower temperatures.
But even with its low conductivity
lava can only be endured for a matter
of seconds before burns are sustained.
One consequence of understanding
the principles behind so-called miracles
is that we can start making predictions.
For instance, we can predict that we’ll never see
David Icke agreeing to deliver his lengthy seminars
while standing on lava.
If he truly believed his physical body
was an illusion, as he claimed
—and as he invites us to believe —
then he should have no problem
holding his own feet to the fire.
But, because we now understand
the principles behind lava-walking
we can safely predict it’s not going to happen.
The Bible isn’t full of explanations.
It’s full of stories.
For any one of the miracles it depicts
we could concoct all kinds of stories.
Take the miracle of Jesus raising
Lazarus from the dead.
We could claim that Lazarus represents
the next stage in human evolution;
that Lazarus is a monkey overlord
exploiting us with holographic illusions;
that Jesus possessed alien cloning technology;
that Lazarus was an avatar.
If Jesus had presented these stories,
rather than his Yahweh story
would we now be believing them instead?
Far from standing out as people
who should be listened to
those who present miracles in support of their claims
instantly mark themselves out as suspect.
In attempting to use miracles as currency
they show us they’re not in the business
of providing explanations.
They’re in the business of selling stories.
And when we buy their stories,
we pay a greater price than we know.
We need to take self-proclaimed prophets off
their pedestals and bring them down to earth.
When people encourage us not to think, we need to
think twice about the company we’re keeping.
We need to take note of any overbearing
or threatening language
being used to try and shut down our critical thinking
and encourage our compliance.
We need to give a wide berth to
those who punish requests for proof.
False prophets often make demonstrable blunders based on their own limited knowledge
failing to imagine that our expanding knowledge
might expose them in the future.
Joseph Smith failed to foresee that our
discoveries about Egyptian hieroglyphics
would expose his false translation of Egyptian
funerary texts as the Book of Abraham.
While supposedly channelling
all-knowing beings from distant planets
UFO prophet Dorothy Martin made several blunders
including a claim that the scientific term ‘sound barrier’
referred to a barrier around the earth
that had been punctured by bombs
and let extraterrestrial communication through
— when in fact the term simply refers to the
sudden increase in drag an object experiences
as it approaches the speed of sound.
Founder of Scientology Lafayette Ronald Hubbard
claimed aliens had been transported
to earth by space planes
that looked exactly like earth’s DC8 aeroplanes.
But an aeroplane’s wings are aerodynamically designed specifically to exploit the properties of air to create lift.
They would be redundant in space.
Anyone can invent a set of laws to live by
but what’s striking in the case of self-styled prophets
is that they’re devoid of the enduring social insights
we would expect from the superhuman
authorities they claim to represent.
Those who use miracles to support their claims
disqualify themselves from consideration.
Any number of outlandish claims could be
made about the same miracle.
If no explanatory connection is made between
miracle and cause, it’s just story-telling.
We need to take great care
about who we put on pedestals.
That’s especially true when we’re talking about
people who claim some superhuman authority.
Because if we succumb to their authority,
we give them licence to redefine our entire reality.
Our susceptibility to prophets begins with ourselves
—how hungry we are for truth rather than comfort;
how determined we are to demand good evidence
rather than accept dogmatic assertions;
how ready we are to draw attention
to the problems we find
rather than allow them to drift
into soft focus and forget about them.
We should also keep in mind that
the manipulative tactics used by prophets
aren't the exclusive domain of religion.
We find similar tactics in other areas including
politics, economics and education.
Wherever we find them, they
should raise red flags and spark our scrutiny.
Billions of us are living with
bogus stories about the world.
We get swept up in those stories
and fail to investigate their origins.
We think our faith is in the story,
but our faith is in the storyteller.
And storytellers abound.
These are the human beings
who design the world’s religions;
who generate all the unsubstantiated,
contradictory detail we hear about gods
— the detailed rituals, the detailed mythical histories,
the detailed lists of bizarre, unjust laws.
The time is long overdue for debunking prophets.